Feat: Add consumer group examples to ACL plugin docs. (#6773)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_hub/kong-inc/acl/how-to/_consumer-groups.md.md

---
nav_title: Using ACLs with consumer groups
title: Using ACLs with consumer groups
---

## ACL configuration with {{site.base_gateway}}

This example covers a common use case: as an API owner, you want to regulate access based on the type of request methods and consumer groups. Specifically, the goal is to allow consumers in the dev group to perform GET, POST, and PUT requests on all routes, while reserving the DELETE request functionality exclusively for consumers in the admin group.

### Create consumers

1. Using the API, create two consumers, `admin` and `dev`: 
     ```bash
     curl --request POST \
        --url http://localhost:8001/consumers \
        --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        --header 'accept: application/json' \
        --data '{"username":"admin"}'
     ```
     ```bash
     curl --request POST \
        --url http://localhost:8001/consumers \
        --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
        --header 'accept: application/json' \
        --data '{"username":"dev"}'
    ```

> The response will contain a UUID in the `id` field that you will need for the rest of the guide. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response for each request contains a UUID in the `id` field that you will need for the rest of the guide. 
```

---
nav_title: Using ACLs with consumer groups
title: Using ACLs with consumer groups
---

## ACL configuration with {{site.base_gateway}}

This example covers a common use case: as an API owner, you want to regulate access based on the type of request methods and consumer groups. Specifically, the goal is to allow consumers in the dev group to perform GET, POST, and PUT requests on all routes, while reserving the DELETE request functionality exclusively for consumers in the admin group.

### Create consumer groups 

1. Using the API, create a consumer group for `dev`:
     ```bash
     curl --request POST \
         --url http://localhost:8001/consumer_groups \
         --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
         --header 'accept: application/json' \
         --data '{"name":"dev"}'
     ```

1. Then create a consumer group for `admin`:
     
     ```bash
     curl --request POST \
       --url http://localhost:8001/consumer_groups \
       --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
       --header 'accept: application/json' \
       --data '{"name":"admin",}'
     ```

> 1. Add a consumer to the `admin` group by using the UUID of the specific consumer:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Using the UUID of an existing consumer, add a consumer to the `admin` group:
```
Wait - you need to have a consumer before you do this? This step doesn't _create_ a consumer, correct? Only adds an existing one? This wasn't mentioned anywhere in prerequisites. Can go one of two ways with this: add steps to create, then add a consumer, or just say you need to have consumers available in a prerequisites section.

    ```bash

>     curl --request POST \
>       --url http://localhost:8001/consumer_groups/admin/consumers \
>       --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
>       --header 'accept: application/json' \
>       --data '{"consumer":"8a4bba3c-7f82-45f0-8121-ed4d2847c4a4"}'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    curl -i -X POST http://localhost:8001/consumer_groups/admin/consumers \
      --data "consumer=8a4bba3c-7f82-45f0-8121-ed4d2847c4a4"
```

    ```

> 1. Then add a consumer to the `dev` group. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Add a different consumer to the `dev` group:
```

    ```bash

>     curl --request POST \
>       --url http://localhost:8001/consumer_groups/dev/consumers \
>       --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
>       --header 'accept: application/json' \
>       --data '{"consumer":"8a4bba3c-7f82-45f0-8121-ed4d2847c4a4"}'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    curl -i -X POST http://localhost:8001/consumer_groups/dev/consumers \
      --data "consumer=8a4bba3c-7f82-45f0-8121-ed4d2847c4a4"
```

    ```

### Create routes 

Using the Admin API and the [expressions router](/gateway/latest/key-concepts/routes/expressions/), create two routes: one that matches `GET`, `POST` and `PUT`, and one that only matches `DELETE`. 

1. Create a route that matches when the method is _not_ `DELETE`:

    ```bash
    curl --request POST \
      --url http://localhost:8001/services/example-service/routes \
      --form-string name=devs-and-admins \
      --form-string expression='http.path == "/example" && http.method != "DELETE"'
    ```

1. Create a route that matches when the method _is_ DELETE:
    
    ```bash
    curl --request POST \
      --url http://localhost:8001/services/example-service/routes \
      --form-string name=only-admins \
      --form-string expression='http.path == "/example" && http.method == "DELETE"'
    ```

### Set up the ACL plugin

Scope the plugin to each of these routes with the respective `allow` configuration.

> 1. Enable the ACL plugin on the `devs-and-admin` route, setting the `allow` field to accept both groups:
> 
>     ```bash
>     curl -X POST http://localhost:8001/routes/devs-and-admin/plugins \
>         --data "name=acl"  \
>         --data "config.allow[]=dev"  \
>         --data "config.allow[]=admin"
>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable the ACL plugin on the `devs-and-admin` route, setting the `allow` field to accept both groups:

<!--vale off-->
{% plugin_example %}
plugin: kong-inc/acl
name: acl
config:
  allow:
    - dev
    - admin
targets:
  - route
formats:
  - curl
  - konnect
  - yaml
  - kubernetes
{% endplugin_example %}
<!--vale on-->
```
Turning this into an example that'll generate four different formats.

Only downside is that the example doesn't have the route name pre-filled. We'll work on adding support for that (currently on the to-do list).

Reviewer 2: That's way better! Thanks for picking that up. We'll need to add `include_consumer_groups: true` to the examples when some of the groups are "cosumer groups" rather than acl groups.

Reviewer: Added the config to the suggested example 👍

> 1. Enable another ACL plugin instance on the `only-admins` route, setting the `allow` field set to only accept the `admin` group:
> 
>     ```bash
>     curl -X POST http://localhost:8001/routes/admins-only/plugins \
>         --data "name=acl"  \
>         --data "config.allow=admin"
>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable another ACL plugin instance on the `only-admins` route, setting the `allow` field set to only accept the `admin` group:

<!--vale off-->
{% plugin_example %}
plugin: kong-inc/acl
name: acl
config:
  allow:
    - admin
targets:
  - route
formats:
  - curl
  - konnect
  - yaml
  - kubernetes
{% endplugin_example %}
<!--vale on-->
```

Reviewer 2: same here -> https://github.com/Kong/docs.konghq.com/pull/6773#discussion_r1471127508

Reviewer: adjusted the config here too
